---
layout: home
---
You like painting you have to be choosing between it as a verb or as a noun. Choose the noun and stop that painting. But if there's difficulty because when you were painting something was more or less coming, you would look and no not yet but emphatically it will come to be approved. Can't quite see it yet but me I'm working on it, so it goes. Another painting finished which leaves us with a finished painting, work done. Horde trade donate abandon destroy or if you can repaint paint on when and as it takes your fancy. But, choosing to value it as it is, as one's own identification you surely treat it with care. Place kept to be looked at, responsibility dwindles to preservation. Will you look at it evermore like that, unpermitted by what, that acheivement, you can't repaint. Some other might like to take final responsibility and if keen enough I'm sure some arrangement will be made isn't one usually ready to profit from labour as the necessary solution and so someone else could get the picture, meanwhile whatever, again getting underway.

But really if you didn't need to stop painting a painting why stop, one does stop so does one need to stop because its gone on long enough, just right pernaps a little too far but this surely wasn't fixed before we set out. Well perhaps setting out from somewhere in particular and one thing leading to another eventually after all somethings are familiar to us, for some maybe its that quaiity which counts. Safe arrival which is to say one regrets the unavoidabie necessity of a distance. One is glad to stop because one already knew where it would arrive successfully. And so on, but really if one didn't need to stop painting a painting why would one stop. Well, maybe its nice to dwell once in a while, nice or necessary, a relief. A chance to look without the necessity of looking ahead, which is to say that one stops because one has reached a place in some way suitable for stopping. Particularly a place which graces favourably the recommencing, so does stopping a painting help one continue painting, it does help one have faith in being able to finish as we say, successfully. A successful painting does tend to make one try again and if playing it safe one will tend to try for the same success again. Or on the other hand if the interest in past acheivement fades as assured well then of necessity one must become a little reckless, laying open to difficulties. Then what if one cannot finish successfully what was embarked upon, and one begins to choose to finish relatively unsuccessfully rather a than go on and on either because one cannot go on and on or because one hopes that by simply stopping regardless of the acheivement one may jump in afresh and be lucky which is always possible apparently. Yet if one is in difficulty one tends to lose faith in acheiving success which is only natural after all it would surely make it easier to continue. Unless of course if one did not need to stop by having strength to continue indefinitely without acheiving any success to sustain hope. Though really if you don't need to stop why will you ever stop, after all one stops for that sustenance to sustain continuing which would seem to be the only alternative to stopping dead which is apparently the state of needing no sustenance which is also the condiion for continuing indefinitely.

So in this by talking of sustenance it would seem I'm thinking of food, fuel, and there we are looking at the painting which has been finished and does it or does it not sustain our interest. Firstly we take it in, that is if deemed worth our while then we can decide does it sustain our interest by simply seeing whether it does, well it has so far but we haven't decided yet, yes it does it's lovely simply gorgeous fascinating but time to go which is not to say one won't be back but then maybe after all it is a bit of a bore perhaps even a piece of worthlessness, then maybe that's what makes it interesting and so it goes having more or less sustained our interest so far. Is that the extent of it, what you get being only got directly from the thing itself. Could perhaps stretch to one's interest in taking an interest, having been interested by painting one will be interested in being interested as the opportunity presents itself, unless of course if one can't make it interesting even though one were still interested in making it interesting and so on. The involvement more or less tenuous depending on how one's attention is held upon the matter in hand.

What is interesting is what is interesting and what is not interesting is what is not interesting. That is, when it is not interesting but then that, as i say, could be interesting, things being apparently uninteresting is something one could take an interest in, which would make it interesting because whatever is interesting is interesting but that could become a bore. Things being made interesting could become something one could be uninterested in. Could you become uninterested in things being made interesting surely not if they were actually made interesting because after all you would not have to force interest in sustaining such a situation. One is of necessity inevitably forced to pay attention if you have a body which you have so there you are but is attention much like saying interest, one can more or less be interested and in this one pays more or less attention. If it's not interesting you're not going to pay much attention except or necessity. Yet it is not that interesting because unsustained one fails to admit the interest that could continue to concentrate, so it goes, one naturally loses interest whenever the attention is not held. Though it's interest that holds the attention. And whatever's interesting in that, in looking, is to identify, or be unable to as the case say be, against one's knowledge of identity.

I read that Picabia was rich.

Being well to do must have its advantages and disadvantages of course but say you want to do something, anything, you know as well as I that sustenance must come into it. Money must make it easier whatever it is but it also makes it always easier, that is, makes it easier to stop.

Once permission had bean granted and he was learning to be a painter what was then the danger that it could turn out a disappointment without much in it. Would he stay stuck with that or would he drop it for something more gratifying, anything within his reputedly substantial means, but no one would drop painting for anything less gratifying, would they. Just perhaps if they couldn't stick with it nor could afford anything more gratifying, or at any rate at least as gratifying as painting. In this case studying the art of painting in Paris at the end of the nineteenth century.

The point of this is that Picabia being well to do was not compelled to engage himself in the activity anymore than was gratifying.

What was gratifying about what he did, it was not adventurous, accepting the conventional form of the art quite readily and from the beginning working within an area of expression which was untroubled in relation to the source of success and reward those famous old annual Salons.

He seems to have found it quite agreeable enough to concur generally with the current notions of goodness and greatness.

The aspirations commensurate with the nature of the landscapes he was painting with increasing critical acclaim up unto 1908 reflect an undemandingness in seeming to expect or require no more in return for a commitment to painting than that a painting should be composed as correct looking picture of what was viewed, a straight forward vision of an anyday view.

The difficulties in this being keeping it just right, not too much putting one off nor too little to hold. Just right to keep one engaged for the time being though as it turns out not engaged enough to be completely engaging indefinitely.

Between 1895 and 1908 Francis Picabia modernized himself to the extent of acquiring the Impressionist mode.

What was its appeal to a young painter who's paintings lacked the Impressionists' light in colour which was still new after twenty years. Was that something he needed, did he need to be new end if so did he only know now when he saw how, apparently just so. What he saw was Sisley.

The charm of tne Impressionist idiom could well have been the way in which it bestowed upon the paintings a quality in which the realisation seemed to accord more with the actual experience of being there at the motif as opposed to the rather more removed quality of being with the heritage of Art. in this way Impressionism could have reinforced any previous suspicious of the object of the exercise being one of being accurate with oneself, yet at that same time it obviously did not supress the conception Of the activity as being one which should consciously aspire to present itself in a grand enobled manner which is as he still did, producing regularly every year large studio paintings such as _Les Pins, effet de soleil a St.-Honorat, Cannes_ and _Port de mer dans le Midi, effet de soleil_ for the salons of 1906 and 1907 respectiveiy.

 In 1905 he signed a contract with the fashionable Gallerie Haussmann, exibited throughout Europe and counted among him patrons some of the most distinguished public figures in France so I'm told.

Impressionism put him in a favourable position. Seems to have been just what was required by the general art purchasing public and they were prepared to reward him for providing both a presentation and a representation which did just the trick, all he had to do in return it was understood was maintain the flow flowing evemore effortlessly.

And if it got to be an effort being thus factory employed it must surely have come from a sense of pressure to act as if fully engaged with what he was doing when in fact he was no longer and more to the point could afford otherwise.

Wife to be, Gabrielle Buffet, in September 1908 found Picabia bored with his past work looking "for revolutionary transformations in pictorial vision... painting endowed with a life of its own exploiting the visual field solely for the sake of an arbitary and poetic organisation of forms and colours free from the contingent need to represent or transpose the forms of nature as we were accustomed to see them. Studies which Picabia showed to no one already achieved a total break with pictorial traditions, others were still based upon an objective scheme which to be sure became less and less precise but in whose structure one could still see the impressionistic suggestion of a landscape."

Something had happened, things were not about to stay the same and in the course of these changes something new could be claimed and this would break the ties which bind leaving him in a way grown up, no more the gallery's boy, off on honeymoon.

Married, what did he need but a happy home. A family and a studio, and in this studio what could one do, the career has been abandoned, no more that convenient objectivity no thank you. A source had been conceived within oneself which in theory should be a delight to tap.

And now, surely not by making like a monkey. If anything is interesting then anything would be of interest and form is broken forthwith. Not necessary to frame within context whatever results of impulse. If you break the hierarchies of interest then what would you get, nothing much, which is not much unless of course it is truely now all there can be seen to be. But that has not been the case generally there has usually been something by way of style so if they can do it I can do mine too but in what form, that was the question I guess.

Continuing on from where he was so as not to get out of depth, Picabia is making angular colourful simplified landscapes. The paint is thick so it is there, lumps and blocks make a place to go by looking as ever, but look at it, unavoidably bits and pieces of paint which are here. Which was surely the most obvious thing the paint is here, that leaves landscape a convention, which is to say understandable. You will find it easier to think you understand what I'm saying if I use a convention but naturally that convention would come to be seen am a hindrance if its very convenience diverted the perception to misinterpretation.

This is with hindsight, making it simple enough to guess what went first, an adherence to being realistic in an objective manner, secondly an adherence to being realistic in a subjective manner. Once this convention of more or less real has been cast aside the situation becomes again more objective. Distortion being no longer such a conspicuous issue, one's focus of attention becomes more clearly concentrated upon the construction with elements at hand.

By l9l2 in paintings such as _Port de Naples L'Arbre rouge_ and _Paysage, La Creuse_ this tendency seems to me to be making itself evident in the more fragmented faceted and inscribed nature of the technique.

One picture of this year which I have actually seen is Jeune Fille, the convention lingering here is one dear to his heart, the Espagnole, yet the convention has been apparently quite purposfully confounded, rendered a source of inconvenience for anyone attempting a quick consumption of the image. The face of this young lady has been constructed quite objective£y with regard to the elements employed, in order to prevent or pervert any more or less realistic if subjective reading of what is not really a face as a face.

As I see it Picabia's interest finally could not have been to make a volumetric interpretation in the manner of the contemporary developers of Cezanne, instead possibly it was the frustration of simple volumetric interpretation that could keep the picture alive and fertile allowing it to carry at the same time an obvious raw delight in its manufacture.

So, 1912, and something is assured as hopeful which is encouraging, and consequently appears a succession of larger more testamental paintings. Picabia's personality was by all accounts ebullient and voluble and it would seen quite to be expected that he would have need to demonstrate his acheivements socially at the Salons and now in 1913 at the Armoury Show, New York.

These big paintings _Danses a la source I & II_, _Figure triste_, _La Source_, _Procession_, _Musique de procession_ and _Procession Seville_ all painted in 1912, reflect Picabia's acheivement in assimilations of the contemporary climate of the art of modern painting, where one must be modern, and or conceiving for himself a means of dealing creatively with being in that developing situation.

Picabia yet still stuck with the convention of figures and landscape, using themes reputedly recalled from that honeymoon in Spain, a religious procession in Seville, two peasant girls dancing. These conceived as memories with particular emotional resonance not dissimilar to a musical emotion, at heart a movement.

In a static context a movement becomes ambiguity and this ambiguity can move you around the place where it is. You follow and fail to find what you could expect to be looking for precisely but you looked and did see what was there which implied that it constituted something but was confounded, but respectfully, for image and image of lack of image work together in a perversity which is a playful pleasure to devise if you wish, as it builds something which is and is not each way, if you see what we mean but you can't quite, so it goes. Abstraction from a figurative conception amounts to pieces of shapes faceting in some edges along a line that figures, another side breaks across the reading holding it open enough.

I would like to mention here in passing before we cross the Atlantic that 1912 also marks the beginning of Picabia's perhaps unique resoluteness in writing when and where he saw fit in his own inimitable clumsy hand without apparent hesitation the title slapbang on the work completed. I find the artlessness of it quite disarming.

As it happened Picabia was the one, perhaps the only one who could afford to go, who turned up in New York along with the Armoury Show and so he got to do the interviews, have the answers and generally be the far-out champion of a modern art phenomenon. The centre of attention, the attraction being the nerve of I say so.

Some watercolours "..you should quickly understand tne studies which I have made since my arrival In New York. They express the spirit of New fork as I feel it, the crowded streets of your city as I feel them, their surging their unrest, their commercialism, their atmospheric charm. I absorb these impressions, I am in no hurry to put them on canvas. I let them remaln in my brain, and then when tihe spirit of creation is at flood-tide, I improvise my pictures as a musician improvises music."

Music look, lines and colours, that is it I say so. And what of it, is subjectivity agressive, a form of defence, being impenerab1e. The jump to New York left behind any remaining visually identifiable content. Figures are out, leaving one this idea of improvisation as a thing to comprehend, that accepted leaves one where he was.

In a picture plane there are many conventions which will tie particular relations of line and colour to established readings of figuration and three dimensionality by aiming to avoid the most imitive forms of figuration Picabia was in consequence ending up in abstract locations, by employing the imperious justification of subjectivity he could permit himself to contact an extent of painting beyond former objective control.

The notion of the theme be it _Chanson Negre, New York_ or _Danseuse Etoile_ was to provide a suitably amenable sham objectivity to act as an anchor point to hang the improvisation upon enabling it some personal context and significance which maintains the subjective justification preventing the business from slipping into a purely objective scientific approach to abstraction. This subjectivity being more or less pretentious in relation to the degree to which Picabia still hoped that painting could transcend its limitations of meaning.

The American experience was presented to Paris at the Salon d'Automne of 1913 by _Udnie (jeune fille anericaine; danse)_ and _Edtaonisl (ecciesiastique)_. There he is in his early thirties with a big original world that is truely his to decide anything, returning with a sense of confidence visible in his work based on no authority but its own contemporary I say so.

What future of painting did he see, an art of suggestion, many things could be touched on free from the need for preconceived identification. This would be an open art giving room to indulge himself in his studio as he would be infront of these paintings he could embellish, flirt with the perverse delight of confounding expectations. A place for the eyes to take the mind.

The technical aspect of this creation lay in the degree of suggestion and in the early paintings the tendency was to adhere quite closely to the faceted areas of landscape convention. The emphasis was in terms of detail and scale, a clear presentation of incomprehensibility and with _Je revois en souvenir ma chere Udnie_ the forms become more rounded more suggestive physically, the effect less impressionistic she elements acquire in their sharp particular delineation a machine tooled appearance and implication.

By C'est de moi qu'il s'agit and Mariage comique the result appears one of optical machines trapping and twisting and scattering the eye among bulbous and curvilinear mechanisms, sex might seem to have something to do with it.

What next, more confusing more amusing, more or less what, well while we are thinking how these paintings would have developed had World War One not started World War One has started and Picabia was by all accounts a sloppy soldier and wisely hops it back to New York good old New York full of friends at 291 which among other things is a magazine.

Now someway painting is out, no more sitting in the studio busily painting and repainting, it's not the time and anyway he must like this new idea of mechanical symbolism perhaps thinking it more appropriate with the mentality of the age. He makes a few portraits and they go in the magazine.

Maybe that abstract painting was turning out a trifle too complicated to comfortably sustain. Subjectivity being all very well but demanding as I say an imperiousness most especially with one's self, and that's a thing which when one's spirits are low can be rather unsuportable. Easier to reason more or less objectively with the weight of deductability behind one more certain.

The portraits function in the manner of metapnor which is to say still subjective and yet when possibly considered accurate quite reasonable which is after all what makes a figure of speech commonly acceptable as objective therefore a spark-plug with brand name FOR-EVER becomes Portrait d'un jeume fille americaine dans l'etat de nudite. But I don't really see convenient comprehensibility as Picabia's preoccupation, when his targets are more simple and obvious his accuracy is directly detectable yet when the aim is more ambiguous the accuracy of the metaphor is less discernible leaving the possible meaning wider, as in the self-portrait Le Saint des Saints.

This is not to say that one does not read quickly that if somothing functions in the mechanical world in some particular service then the subject of the metaphor is by implication performing a similar service, his wife as a windshield. This impression being received mainly from the style of mechanical illustration in which the works are presented minimizing the connection to old painterly delectable qualities.

You can see this is something one thinks up in the head ideas perhaps stimulated by magazine advertisements and technical illustrations in service manuals, not things in which the thought and the working with the physical medium are intimately alternating as it evoives.

They have been conceived and executed cleanly and I would epect that whatever was added to the initial conception would generally have been among the inscriptions which these portraits carry. Thnk and write, write a word write an image in the manner of poetry rather than music.

Some paintings sore in the manner of impression rather than meaning were made looking more than ever like machines symetrical and by suggestion quasi-functional. Such simple compositional arrangements present a resonance which is clear and uncompromising.

In _Reverence_ the alignment of the disks beneath the oblique line suggests by slight displacement a revolving reaping movement within the circle while simultaneously the two apparent grills in perspective unbalance by presenting opposite experiences for each eye as it were. The inscriptions say the rest namely this is what we make in New York hotel rooms 1914.

Cette chose est faite pour perpetuer non souvenir. presents four disks connected to a central disk by lines which read as tubes inscriptions imply the disks could be if you like gramophone records but whatever significance they could have mm such is personal and unconveyed yet it does perpetate his memory, in our history, funnily enough.

A pleasure could have been taken in this bareness and apparent inoperableness in the sense of inflicting these qualities upon someone who was expecting somewhat the opposite of what was given yet this willful perversity can be only half the story acting as a foil which can either underline or cover the visual grip of the painting. This applies to _Tres rare tableau sur la terre_ it's a fine match for its title the sombre industrial mining quality can be either trivialized by the over statement or graced by the exaggeration in the title.

The use of metallic paint and cardboard I expect was to give these paintings a homemade roughness which when combined with machine ambiance would add extra resonance to their appreciation.

_Voila la femme_ is coarser stuff, the target is woman as a piece of cosmological plumbing which is a desire to present an offensive vision which is felt to be the base objective reality. _Le fiance_ is a cog wheel. _Machine tournez vite_ as man and woman driving each other at a ratio of one to three point six. _Voila elle_ woman as a target aiming revolver at herself. Parade amoureuse more in the same vein likewise _Prostitution universelle_, the titles are partisan speaking for themselves. Picabia is styling himself the enemy of conventional hypocritical reality which is messing up his life no end. A life of pleasure is soured, this man almost forty has he not become a little bitter with this world war.

An unfulfilled military mission necessliated a run around the Caribbean ending in Barcelona.

Visually one can only say so much, to make one's point if its something clearer to say than to show better may It. Since the start of this war Picabia has shown a fondness for invective metaphor, the world is falling short and he will say so in 391 his magazine weapon vehicle for poetry and polemic.

On returning from Barcelona to New fork things went from bad to worse in that he appears by all accounts to be suffering from a growing and debilitating exasperation called a neurasthenic condition which takes him to Switzerland to the doctor.

Switzerland being neutral was a popular place with those not inclined to dying in ditches and for whom the Atlantic was apparently too wide so they were in Zurich and more or less going crazy too.

Dada being their alternative could cover just about anything they put themselves up to so long as it embodied their excitable nihilism. It must have been nice to discover Picabia because he was obviously Data too, Dada was everywhere it was an international modern movement or could be which was something. Enemy of the world at war, the anti-army army.

The war now ended in peace.

I expect one would have to regard this opportunity with mixed feelings one hadn't started it in the first place war had been an arbitrary imposed restriction and as such had had to be accommodated as best as possible. But from this condition peace is an equally arbitarily imposed release from restriction and as such requires of one either a resumption of the past previous to that interruption or alternatively if such a resumption of the past had been rendered inconceivable on account of the experience entailed in tne restrictions then of necessity one is compelled to bring to the renewed opportunity an aggressiveness perhaps even resentment derived from whatever pent up force had accumulated during tne interval of repressions and now would be aimed at the nationaliatic and institutional mentalities which had rendered the whole fiasco possible in the first place.

Back in Paris what would he do, there was talk of a gallery which came to nothing and his marriage had all but fallen apart, but already there's another lady so he's busy as ever and _L'Enfant carburateur_ and _Serpentins_ are hung under the stairs at the Salon d'Automne. They had to accept them as Picadia had some associate entitlement to exibit dating from when a respecable Impressionist otherwise they would most probably have been refused I'm told. Under the stairs indeed, Picabia accepting it as a calculated insult and was veiled censorship, attacks with open letters of outrage. The poet-war campaign has begun, Tzara arrived at his invitation and a Dada gang is in operation.

_L'Enfant carburateur_ is by implication about sex depending on how much you know about carbuators you get an idea, something to do with sex as mechanistic intercourse, a machine making man reproducing mechanically. But any meaning is unsubstantially read, the inscriptions being oblique. The image in no way inviting of voyeurism, sex in the abstract devoid of surrogate pleasure.

An impersonal objective vision subjectively conceived together with an unsettling uncertainty that this could be made as a painting make it potentially disasterous to any congenitally unsympathetic contemporary viewer. However if that vision of Picabia's is felt to be in accord with one's own conceptions or possible conceptions it surely then reads as an elegant token off camaraderie for what few real ones around. What one would be identifying are one's sympathies.

Serpentins apparently lacking engagement with meaning external to painting leaving it incomprehensible except as what he made as it is made tied with the title. Do what with it is the question the rest is open to interest and yet the interest being insuificiently precisely taunted leaves it rather implacable and neutral, representing perhaps the alternative related more to pre-war painterly conceptions which Picabia, engaged in public battle, would keep more to himself over the following years.

1920 back at the Salon d'Automne with two paintings _Adam & Eve_ and _Le Rastaquoquere_ which are no longer with us but they seem to have drawn a crowd.

1921 Salon des Independante, _Le Double Monde_ and _Le Lierre unique eunuque_. The former having already been presented on stage the year previous at the first Parisian Dada entertainment, it ie a thing for an audience to read, a sandwich-board announcing the double world of ambiguous and contradictory relations, an unstable convention including the title itself. A puzzle made not to obtain to resolved answer instead containing clues of an attempt to capture a provocative potential perhaps in the hope that it could sustain some interest by flirting its fertility. This essentially invalidates any attempt to assess the precise singularity of aim Picabia was applying. Once again all one can identify are one's own sympathies and these in relation to the nonverbal elements which in their own way form the central core of one's puzzlement being one step further removed from the language of explaination, existing visually as fact in fact impenetrable as i said.

_Le Lierre unique eunuque_ is yet more private still, the title can be conceived to refer to the painting in the sense that painting and ivy exist in a similar relation in what they cling to and cover or am I not stretching the point, this covering being both unique and eunuch the play on words reflecting something of the paradox in the urge to create something for oneself to cover oneself with one's own uniquenese in order to be seen as an end in oneself. Machine Co. contradicting this with inuendo of impersonal businesslike replication of the visual elements regular in manufacture presenting irregularisations of the target in the lower left, something to look at.

Meanwhile the Dada business is falling into management problems. Supposedly by its very nature unmanageable this proclaimed assault on reasonable law proved to be a marketable commodity exchanging outrage for reputation, usual revolutionary bandwagon. Though Picabia it would seem did not have this ambitiousness instead proclaiming an abborence of all forms of coercion in the service of beliefs, regardless of his potential sympathy. Coercion would ruin everything, his partisan actions centered simply around defining himself uncompromisingly against the rest of us. For a while there was fun to be had in the company of Dada, his reputation and indifffarence to repetation enauled him clearly to remain a law unto himself fraterniafng with the nemy as tfley pleased him yet by virtue off hia by now natural subversiveness he was to many the doyen of the movement and it was in this capacity that he was elected a member of' the committee of the Salon d'Automne 1921.

His entries of this year were _Les Yeux chaud_ and _L'Oeil cacodylate_, the former being more or less a tongue in cheek acknowledgenent of the attempts at reform at the salon. Conceived as such it is something of a return to the more precise form of mechanical symbolism employed by Picabia when having a specific objective, the form reflecting the intention which as I say some have thought to be at least half way to ridicule but I'm not so sure he is a little happier now and I don't think naturally given to spite.

Alternatively _L'Oeil cacodylate_ represents clearly a simultaneous provocativeness and disengagement. This painting I imagine was for some time by the door of Picabia's apartment and that it amused him somewhat to have it turn out the way it did filled up by his friends. The question of whether or not this is Art was obviously going to be asked yet by exibiting it he had effectively answered or rather ignored as inessential, the question. Picabia was presenting his friends among whom questions of the works validity in the hall of fame and noble achievement were less legalistic. It was something created in their everyday lives and did not have to be accomodated within the impersonal strucure of official importance. To see it in the Salon was to see it as their club sign, the club of Picabia whose idea it was which is why we are his friends.

But next year at the Salon des Independants a different story, two off the three paintings entered were refused on constitutional and therefore according to Signac who was president, undiscriminatory grounds. The two refused were _La Veuve Joyeuse_ and _Chapeau de paille_, both with very little paint. The first the presentation off a photograph of Picabia at the wneel of his car labeled PHOTOGRAPHIE, below it a drawing of the photograph labled DESSlN. You see how easy it is to describe the picture it is mostly just that, something to be talked about, the question of course being whicn is the merry widow and who was the husband. One supplies one's own answers.

Alternatively _Chapeau de Paille_ also poses a question, a little innocent incitement to outrage: M...... pour celui qui le regarde! apparently suggestive of merde if you wish or as Picabia himself claimed, merci. Art gossip is the toy of this man securely independant, a pastime among fast cars and wealthy entertaining friends, or so the story goes.

The third work, the one accepted _Danse de Saint Guy_ was some cord stretched in an empty frame plus a few inscriptions. Paint itself, the coloured stuff is not much in evidence these days but he never abandons it for long.

And so it happened that in 1922 Picabia moved out of Paris to the village of Tremblay-sur-Mauldre, buying on the spot the house-garage of a departing favourite mechanic.

Life in the country did not hold for long though and for the next two and a half yeara he travelled to and fro between it and Paris. It could have been these intermittent separations from the life of Paris which was in someway responsible for the next contributions to the Salon d'Automne, _La Feuille de vine_ and _La Nuit Espagnole_. These are figurative paintings. I'm told there was a trend towards a neo-classicism in the twenties and it has been suggeated that it was in a spirit of mockery that Picabia undertook these paintings. The first by combining a conspicuous demonstration of decorum in the form or a large leaf, the shame of Adam, with the notion of Dessin Francais, the national heritage, the ability to draw well and enoble man, dominating the ubiquitous dot the globe perhaps. But the personality of this figure belongs not to the nation but to its creator who took it also into his head to draw out the nose and curl up the lip thereby leaving his mark.

From this it perhaps was clear that for him a return to figure painting could renew or revitalise old interests. La Nuit Espagnole next, if the previous had been a comment upon the prudery of French chauvinism then this could be in acknowledgment of his Spenish blood as if that really meant anything, a little more passion perhaps and that's what we have. Nocturnal courtship, targets on the lady's heart and genitalia with a smattering of little dots like pistol shots. The whole phrasing of this relationship is made with a directness not possible in earlier mechanistic representations and though the use of silhouette renders the figures little more than fairground ciphers presenting essentially the familiar objective vision of the event the use of costume and gesture yet lends it a new myological ambiance.

Over the time that Picabia had been exibiting and more to the point, producing pictures regularly to show specificaly at the salons he seems to have been engaged in other less public picture making activities. The things in question can not be securely dated and should be simply regarded as from this eneral period. They consist almost intirely of drawings and watercolours, the less major more casually personal mediums. And though often titled they are apparently low on charged subject matter, reading as circle and line arrangements conceived often in mechanical or electrical terminology and look to me like they come from a desire to make abstract pictures which elaborate neither a spatial location as in the 1913 sketches of New York nor the purejy fine art relationships used as evidence of spirituality that were current at this time.

Picabia's drawings often centre around an element of optical play, targets and tricks of looking, concentric circles as in Optophone which read as direct metaphors of origin, of coming from or to a point depending on how you look at it.

In what is generally taken to be Optophone I we have a naked lady centered on her sex, a shard of ochre cuts across along her figure to lenn a touch of instability. The meanings one may draw from her location are quite clearly focused showing Picabia as working exclusively in the sense of creating elementary yet elegantly sufficient digrams to accompany his own life.

_Optophone II_ uses similar format of concentrlc circles acting as a trumpet as te title suggests or to stretch the point as a sphincter passing a wind of art, an assortment of indigestible debris, perhaps he too stretched his imagination thus.

Sphinx is another drawing from about this time, three circles joined by lines which for all the world look like they were meant to be bands or cords held taught between the circles read as pegs or wheels, an old trick used in paintings such as _Prenez garde a la Painture_, _L'Oeil_, _Balance_ and _Souvenir du rien_ which like the drawings show a desire to present cold combinations of circular and linear elements yet by presenting them with a graphic shorthand for metallic and mechanical components they are prevented from being general and spiritual in interpretation.

Things placed closer to 1922 however show am abandonment of the more representational aspects, _Decaveuse_ harks back to the baldness of Reverence though this complicated little structure is less pregnant with its title, more mysteriously mundane, an artifact from another culture on exibit. It is not difficult to conceive how this little impliment could be dismembered and rearranged to form an abstract composition devoid of any of the qualities of mysterious utility it posesses leaving us only with a broken picture.

Such a broken picture could be Fixe with the title conceived ironicaly in reference to the imperiousness I mentioned earlier. But then again perhaps not ironical, Volucelle hardly seems like a jibe being by far too spare and too impenetrable to read as anything other than a meditation of esoteric activity. Yet if you think so maybe it worked, he fooled you we fooled ouselves, but then would it be worth his while, I think not but what else is there to talk about six dots four black two blue. As often is the case Picabia's power is in his dubiousness which forces us either to abandon it or move with him.

A large painting of the same name _Volucelle II_ was exibited along with an _Optophone_ at the Salon des Independants 1923. Using likewise an arrangement of circles this time in tne primary and secondary colours plus black, containing various numbers of small circles and set against vertical bands of increasing frequency from left to right. To look at this decorative field is to toy with the significance of details, to inquire after its conception in his mind. The vertical bands are used similarly in a watercolor Conversation the circles alternatively in this case female torsos broken with colour as in _Optophone I_, whether from this we are entitled to draw the conclusion that the circles of Volucelle with their little seeds inside are women or vice versa I am not inclined to say.

These are all consciously obscure pictures, their uncommitted complexity from simple elements leaves them as I say decorative opportunities for speculation. Decorativeness informs also _Radio Concerts_, the use of symetrical and asymmetrical relations to produce a resonance of radiance similar to the emanation of music from a wireless. The sensation of radiance is further employed as the title suggests, in Lampe. The connections possible between a glowing disk and a face, between circles and eyes, between superimposition and forward progression are all made and exploited for the purpose of being lightly interesting in the rococco sense.

This atmosphere of rather wandering research is further augmented by the return of Picabia in 1922 to the Gallerie Haussmann exhibiting more than a hundred drawings of toreadors, Spanish belles, friends and entertainers. His style in these drawings seems in tne few which have survived to be a simple accessible rendering resembling caricature and fashion illustration, seemingly devoid of self-conscious artistic considerations that would allow them to become considered timeless works of beauty. They belong to the world in which they were created to the time that could regard them as within the current popular self-image of the age.

_Dresseur d'animaux_ was Picabia's last contribution to the Salon d'Automne 1925 seems not much more than a humorous representation of a dog act, its decorative charm renders it something of a harmless joke. The interest in spuring the Salons by him presence seems almost played out. Attempts at this time to form an alternative Salon were ultimately abandoned. The twenties were to be a conservative decade, the sequence of hope and despair experienced in the previous two decades had apparently flagged into a return to social and economic stability and as Lampe was hanging in the 1924 Salon des Independants regarded as an inoffensive toy, Picabia was off to Cannes having fun I suppose what did he care he would change with the times.

Chance would have it that at this time Picabia became responsible for the decor and scenario of Relache, and the film Entr'acte which interluded it. A cooperative exercise between Picabia, Satie, Rene Clair and the Swedish Ballet, a post-dadaist gang in which light-hearted hedonistic satire prevailed. Yet despite the fun obviously had by all, the snipeing of pet hypocrisies, neither the stage nor the screen were to become a career. Picabia's interest was not in an empire of audiences but rather in a priveledged club of friends. Already he was making plans to abandon Paris for the Cote d'Azur where he would more than ever play recluse and host.

So, by the end of the year, 1924, Picabia had left and installed himself in a grand mediterranean residence of his own design. Here he resumed painting as a truely consuming occupation. The Salon paintings of recent years had mostly been done in ripolin enamel paint, it had become his favourite medium. Its suculent qualities facilitating the stylistic procedure he now began to adopt. Essentially a medium of one consistency it lends itself to either areas of flat colour such as in Jardin or as he now began to employ it as a source of reiterative lines and dots. Le Rochers a St.-Honorat being an example of how on returning to the lanuscape he was pleased to paint it but no longer as a serious Impressionistic endeavor merely as a toy to be decorated.

Further landscapes continue this frivolity by the use of collaged elements feathers macaroni shoe insoles the like. Plumes Midi Retour des Barques make me toink of the things one can find on the walls of seaside restaurants. They are imitations of paintings which in turn are imitations of pictures, not of art but of popular picture making, postcard style. The source of pleasure in this manner would seem to be the way in which non-art materials are incorporated within a picture not to introduce an element of heightened reality by the use of a non-art representation of an object or the object itself but instead to have these real objects representing paint in the role paint would play.

It is necessary as always to conceive that Picabia was fully aware off what he was doing and whatever reaction we might have has been anticipated. Or conversely that he considered it no further than that the idea occured to him, in which case it might well be that his pictorial instinct had the situation under control and likewise he may have been fully aware of this. In which case we must as ever be prepared for the intention of creating critical paranoia which is in a direct sense a challenge to the form of serious critical anaiysis intended to certify and consolidate the state of the art into an acheived standard of quality.

The use of popular convention extended also to heads as in Matchwoman and potted plants. The still life was a stratagem of convenient neutrality Picabia rarely used in his career but when not having a subject exterior to painting and wanting to paint prior to 1924 he would have fallen back on his mechanistic vocabulary though by now that was rather a dead duck or less and a plant with flowers has instead to serve as substitute opportunity for lines and dots which in turn permit paintcan tops brushes stretcher wedges string and lead wire coi1s, all this so he can make a picture for himself far from the ennobling high art that was for him the paralysis of life.

Apart from tnis resting easy with unresting easiness Picabia had as ever sex and ladies and gentlemen to do pictures with, and now they come in the form of an embrace, lovers drinkian from each other's eyes. This is not the deadpan manner or the pictorial unambitiousness of the figuration in previous years but a directness of men and women with love or is it lust. Impersonal metaphor has been replaced by a personal add pernaps somewhat mysterious creation of an event. The obvious limitations of correct representation are dismissed in an intensification of their abstract power. Facial features are amplified either by a multiplication or by simplification, this combined with the general hastily sketched quaiity often over previous pictures creates visions with a nervous hallucinated passion quite in accord with the palpitations of the participants.

Perhaps the combination of Picabia's congenital enthusiasm for the subject of courtship combimed with the vulgarising simplification of ripolin pushed him to come to painting afresh, I imagine him saying to himself of course why didn't I think of it before. Developing new conceptions of the possibilities still inherent in the medium if approached in the right way, and from this time onwards he does permit himself more freely to create characters, fake human beings.

Several of these embrace paintings use the superimposition of what amounts to multiple viewpoints amalgamated in order to present a number of connections simultaneously. _Souvenir de Juan-les-Pins_, _Les Amoureux_ and _Idylle_ each are augmented by the laying of the lovers among sketchy references to yachts, the sea, trees, palmtrees, houses and the hillsides of the Cote d'Azur. _ldylle_ being the most direct example with man identified with tne houses along tne coast painted inside his neck and head, holding the head and hand of woman whose face ripples with multiple eyes and lips while yachts course across her chest, which is all more or less symbolism to be sure. An openly poetic tableau of his new life which did surely seem to have some potential to be idyllic. In my romance of Picaia this placing of himself in the sun by the sea reads as leading perhaps quite unimtentionally to a condition of timelessness, the grip of the new century modernity is broken.

This modernity could by now have come to seem a matter of course, he was rich remember and could afford to take modern conveniencies for granted which in its way would leave life no longer seeming most modern in its thrills, only the old problem of the idle rich remains, how to fill one's life with more than trifles or rather to make that more than momentarily gratifying.

For Picadia it was surely ripolin from the tin which was his luxury beyond luxuries, working away painting over and over everything permitted, looking for little tricks and things to engage his attention. Perhaps more than ever now he had to support painting for himself and at this point enter the Old Masters funnily enough. For some reason he had got it into his head to transpose works by famous painters of the past, an example of this being Les Trois Graces from the Rubens of the same name. The replete flesh of Rubens' ladies has been exaggerated some might say ridiculed as far as possible within the linear gouache style employed. In _Venus & Adonis_ taken from Titian the relationship between this bare technique and the original can be seen as simplification with the intent of intensifying. Lines of muscular force are emphasized and multiplied, details are divorced from any illusion of reality. Maybe he had bought some art books for the new home and perhaps the story goes that if that is art, the important stuff held over our heads in admonition then I will do what I do which is the opposite so let's see how that would look. It was an opportunity to make paintings whose subjects encompassed European cultural history from Greet and Roman myths through Renaissance interpretation and aggrandizement to their present day reinterpretation by the anti-artist par excellence. This perhaps relating at least in part to the sense off timelessness I conjectured earlier for he is in fact playing tne buffon with history, renefining himself out of it. These paintings to this day remain on the perifery of that European Culture and as such relate to its periphery.

From his point of view however they might have offered yet another opportunity to explore the creation of characters in events as in _Bucolic_, _Hotel ancien_, _Idyll_, and _Blue phantoms_ which could amuse momentarily in the manner of short tales.

From here develop more complex and historicelly diverse combinations of imagery. The summer of l927 was spent in Barcelona and while these it seems he was impressed with the Catalan Romanesque frescos at San Clemente de Tahull. He could well have already been familiar with these frescos as the earlier use of multiple eyes suggests derivation from tne Apocalyptic Lamb. At any rate Romanesque motifs are appropriated now and combined with contemporary imagery as in _Female head_ and _Romanesque visage of Christ_, _Jeune fille au paradis_, _Chiromis_, _Barceloma_ and _Lazarus and the lamb_.

Though in works such as _Machaon_ and _Butterflies_ a playful narrative element is still much in evidence the potential inherent in the superimposition of images is what begins to wholely preoccupy Picabia. I suspect he seriously felt he had stumbled upon something which pictorially could be his thing to do and would be a new style which he could devote himself to and this would provide him with an artistic identity which essentially he had lost since the demise of the mechanistic business.

One reads that all members of the family have preserved vivid memories of the fervour with which he worked now, on some mornings going to tho studio at five in the morning and would not emerge until the noon or evening meal all the while barring the entrance to the studio and insisting that the food be left at the door.

The transparencies, as they have become known, are a wistful compound of gazing faces, figures, foliages and fantastic beasts. Until about 1930 the source of the main images being most frequently Botticelli and after that date replaced by figures from della Francesca.

One of which I can speak with first hand experience is Sphinx of 1929. Dark in tonality and heavily varnished presenting a densely complicated mesh of images which took considerable time to connect follow and identify, even then some of the most obvious things did not register until I was giving it a last cursory glance. The picture presented itself primarily as a screen and indeed at this time Picabia had written in the preface to a film scenario he had devised, one which was not indended to be filmed but rather the reader was requested to project it upon the magic screen of his own immagination. There was no invitation to examine technique the thing to be looked at was the hallucination of images which in a sense jumped in and out of focus as one scanned the illusory depth of the picture plane. Little conclusion could be drawn concerning the meaning of the relations, remaining an enigmatic tableau of gestures and glances.

One thing which distracted my attention from indulging fully in the openness of meanimg was what seemed to me the distinctly unfashionable pre-war style of drawing those classical types which rendered the actors im this jumbled scene rather unconvincing in that they are clearly adopted roles, their true character being contemporary with the period. Which as I say prevents one from transcending the medium as if it were truely a photograph of the astral plane. Things remain here, the medium clearly suffers from a little self-deception which if you think about it given the nature of mediums can be unfortunate but necessary. Often the only way to get through is to pretend you are getting through, if you want to try it's surely better than nothing, if it's not then obviously you're not interested in trying that. Once more what we see are our own sympathies.

As the thirties progress Picabia holds to this use of overlying images yet in a 1935 group of paintings exibited in Chicago there is an attempt at an alternative, a simple figure or figures rendered in flat colour and dark outlines. Subjects depicted are still somewhat classical in geature and garb. It is difficult to find much justification for these paintings, are they intended as monumental or ironic. What monumentality they could possess is undermined by the genre and technique. The irony in turn is undermined by the apparent innocent genuineness of the image. Whatever aggression there could be seems improbable if directed against such hopelessly inoffensive treatments of subjects such as _Femme a l'angelot_ or _La vielle paysanne_. More dramatic themes such as Homme et femme au bord de la mer and Iphigeneia seem equally undeserved targets for ridicule, the latter being copied directly from a Roman fresco at Pompeii. Man with a skull is a simple perhaps unambitious painting of a man pointing at the skull memento mori you you understand, nothing could be clearer except that it is hard to see this painting as conceived as a good painting in the sense of an out-of-reach masterpiece. The means employed lead one to conclude that no great display of talent, not to mention genius, has been attempted in any conventional sense, which leaves it rather a picture for laymen who feel they have no specialised knowledge of these things. Yet this of course must remain a misconception as the sophistication required to double-take it as such precludes the poseibility of one being such a layman, except by identifying within oneself such a layman-like appreciation divorced from any desire for the more straight-forwardly ambitious artifice which would hold such paintings in horror, embarassingly injurious to pride. Is this a perversity against himself or ratner in the manner of the flagellants of religious dicipline, against what he conceives to be the aspiration to servile glory which if you remember he has already tasted and appreciated he afford (sic) otherwise. Afford to serve only himself securely independent, what can he serve except his vainity of acheivement, his acheivement which I would see as aiming to be the antithesis of the vanity of a glorious respectability.

Yet as I said other paintings of this period still retained ambition of more complicated visual expression though their continued use of superimposition employes a more contemporary imagery. Rather grotesque clowns which perhaps to our surprise, ghastly paintings that they are, express themselves perfectly and we in turn assume we understand them perfectly, lapses of taste, reading failure of character and mask, means of presentation and reasons for presentation, as failure of intention.

Exoticism and eroticism come to replace the wistful melancholic classicism, naked replaces nude as in Dream and Jeune fille. Others of moorish women overlayed with birds, Ete and Paons, have an unimportant decorativeness which leaves the style embarked upon ten years previously played out in light-hearted sensual trivia. What pretentiousness there had been in the transparancies had been permitted by the enthusiasm of wishful thinking, his and others, there had been many successful exhibitions in Cannes and with Gallerie Rosenberg in Paris, but naturally none of this had been enough to sustain it for Picabia and as the ground was covered Picabia unerringly abandoned it in favour of a more vulgar earthbound fantasy.

The Second World War is coming but meanwhile he has taken a fancy to painting landscapes as of old as if he were ceasing to be an artist, abandoning the morality of strenuousuess and vacationing as a Sunday painter. Vulgarity in the sense of artistically unrefined does become more than ever the main quality of his work and I see little reason to believe that it was unintentional or ill-considered. A photograph of l939 shows him in his studio, brush in hand, chuckling before his blonde reclining naked in a landscape of cherry blossom. His vision and fantasy is specific and earthy and yet curiously more than ever removed from the world to which he could belong, the world of aspirations. The ease with which he can relegate himself to a kind of base gratification is I feel due to perhaps an indifference to the necessity for gratification, an indifference which enables him to place himself at the essential, almost childish fulcrum of his desires.

It has been said that throughout the war Picabia was in need of money and thus the naked ladies, sold to lecherous clients in south Africa. Be that as it may for in these so called alimentary paintings Picabia clearly is presenting that vulgarity which has come to be seen as essentially at the heart of his sensitivity. The rejection of the artistic refinement which would be intended to correct out the unpresentable rawness which is seen to render work undignified by being too conspicuounly human and therefore by that reasoning insufficiently noble to impres and sustain us in the quest for higher things. And yet they are not without their own brand of complexity and symbolic suggestiveness as for example with the strategic flower in _Adam & Eve_. The combination of display and coyness in the woman of Spring. The expression of the dog in Woman and bulldog I take to be something of a self-portrait.

Others such as _Montparnasse_ or _Adoration of the Calf_ deal with specific ideas in terms of this direct conception of an unpretentious painted image. Perhaps here Picabia is making his most direct confrontation with photography, the merry widow making it with the assasin of her husband grim though it may sound. These were grim times, in 1942 there was an exihition of tableaux de poche, small heads painted on the back of cigarette packets which at one time Picabia had considered displaying in a suitcase made to look like a miniature gallery illuminated with cycle-lamps.

One way and another the war comes to an end as before leaving Picabia back in Paris and sixty-six. There were some young painters around with whom he became associated. The force of their work was firmly abstract, concerned with material and texture. Those miniature paintings of l942 as I said dealt with pictures as faces, perhaps the most familiar and basic element in our visual knowledge of identity, and perhaps the most subtle, from it we can read maybe the whole range of expressible emotions the consuruction of the image developing the muscular language of the face. This is one of the most basic qualities of what we call primitive art, the construction of personages related to man's conceptions of heaven and hell, Negro masks gargoyles and the like. They relate specifically to inherent desires for celebration, and apprehensions of fear, most particularly the transient and precarious pleasures of this life and in their relation to uhe immanent unleashing of the unknown beyond all possibilities, of death.

I feel that his painting now becomes most precisely that, the product of his awaited demise. That unknown of dying must surely throw the solidity of necessity and the insubstantiality of imagination into a strange contrast. The screen of painting becomes the final place where all the living of pictures, the decisions and the discoveries he has seen himself make becomes at one and the same time the toy of his life of having been trying to do something in accord with himself, and the opening unto what is unknown and to which he must now submit himself.

Painting becomes more than ever repainting, lines and dots as ever forming the nexus of his repetoire. Dots as glows, radiations, centres of energy, the spark of life in paint, the mysterious primitive substance in which one may make suggestions with almost the colours of the world, forms of almost any world. In fetish-like images paint is made to speak most self-consciously of what only it can show. All his past preoccupations live embedded within the act of painting and repainting. Eyes which are more or less dots, signs of life, become likewise flowers, marks to draw the attention, blemishes. here now are descendants of the Apocalyptic Lamb, creatures of the imagination, beasts of the Romanesque vision, reflecting conceptions of the extremities of life. Kalinga brooding horned polyp. The dark stare of Je vous entends. Crossed-eyes of Generation Ascendante perched over what one may read as the reproductory orifice with attendant sperm-like seeded dot. The hovering parting quality of Viens avec moi la-bas. This is as rehersed in the transparencies, mediumistic activity, scratching for an image which of its own will obtain to what lies at the back of his mind. But now fully conceived in the self-conscioussess of that raw vulgarity which brings his use of the medium in complete accord with itself.

In each painting it is as if he were rehersing a suitably poetic or ominous departure, or conversely devivering an equally suitable humorous or hedonistic farewell as is Bal negre, a favourite nightclub, or _Elle danse_ recalling Udnie which had recently been unearthed and sold to the nation. His return to Paris had brought his reputation as the real old rogue an affectionate tolerance and respect from the art public in a way which can only be accorded to a man about to be cut off. His loss will be a loss of a truely persistent enthusiasm.

Last paintings reduce to an encrusted ground, many previous images covered back to a light ground augmented with a few dots, a line or two as in _Deraison de la nature_ or _Silence_, signed and dated mostly in his inimitable manner which refuses to permit that we separate the object from its origin, one of us
